---
layout: post
title: Open source software for practical psychometrics
published: true
---

Many of the large testing companies have seen their software cloned or emulated for the popular R environment. [Cito](http://www.cito.nl), the Dutch National Institute for Educational Measurement, has decided to publish a new generation of its software as open source. An R package, [dexter](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dexter), is already available at CRAN. There is also software for standard setting, which is not an R package but has an interface to dexter, and can be downloaded from Cito's cite.

Cito has 50 years of everyday experience with high stake educational tests. The software is shaped by this experience, with a focus on simple and transparent methods and highly efficient estimation procedures. Underneath, there is solid data management, and a set of well polished tools to examine the data before modelling. These range from the basic Classical Test Theory statistics such as p-values, item-test and item-rest correlations, Cronbach's alpha, distractor plots, to less known but powerful techniques such as Haberman's (2007) interaction model, generalised to also cover polytomous items.

The basic psychometric model for test calibration is a polytomous extension to the extended marginal Rasch model that we call ENoRM (extended nominal response model with fixed slopes). This can be estimated with either comditional maximum likelihood methods or with a Gibbs sampler. Correspondingly, person abilities can also be estimated by either maximum likelihood or a Bayesian approach (plausible values).  

__dexter__ has been written, unapologetically, as a true R package. All its functions are accessible for programming, which is important for flexibility and reproducibility. However, the most typical operations are facilitated by _shiny_ graphical interfaces. The same is true of the underlying data base: depending on the user's needs, it can be largely ignored or accessed in R or SQL. One could say that the package scales well, both in terms of problem size and user sophistication.


